We're at the final episode
of the online course
so I thought of inviting
my director and actor friends
along with the course participants
to talk about, I guess,
the next phase in writing a play.
Like I said, writing
doesn't end with the first draft.
It has to become a production
since it's the biggest
objective of a script.
It's not for publication,
though it could be published,
but the final goal
is for it to be performed.
Therefore, it needs some help
from a director and from actors
so I invited Maribel,
JK, and Chris,
who are well-known
for directing plays,
and some known artists
in theater and film,
Angeli and Ross.
Welcome!
Good day!
Participants Maynard, J-mee,
and Dingdong are here as well.
They've been with me
in this entire journey.
I invited all of you
because many
beginning playwrights
don't know what to do
after writing a play.
I wanted to ask you all
as directors, and also as actors,
what do you look for
in new original work?
What will excite you?
Not only in terms of topic,
but also in terms of style,
style of writing,
of language, and so on.
Maybe we could start from there.
Actually, I've been quite fortunate
since I get to hear
the ideas first before the script.
The story's discussed with me
even before the script is written.
There's already a collaboration
from idea to story development.
That's exciting to me
because even before the words
are put on paper,
there's already engagement
with the directors early on
so somehow the visions
of the two major collaborators
are already melded together.
I've been very lucky because
I've been working
with playwrights
who are very open to
that kind of process.
- Because you're also a playwright.
- Yes.
Being one also helped
since I understand the process.
Going back to your question,
what excites me to begin with a story?
It's offering something important.
It's a waste of hours
or even years of development
if what I want to do
doesn't have meaning.
It needs to say
something important.
And you need to have some
personal engagement with the story.
You have a stake there.
It should somehow touch a certain core
of your beliefs and emotions,
or even personal stories
that could contribute to the story.
And I guess, as a director,
as a storyteller,
it's important that you commit
to the story early on.
Or you can also reverse the process
since the script
hasn't been written yet.
It's possible for the script
to fall on your lap
and you read it
and you know.
My work as a theater director
mostly revolves around devised new works
so I see texts or scripts
as one of the devices in performance.
But there are shows like Virgin Labfest
where you're given a script
and that script is the end goal.
Whenever I read a finished script,
I always look for two things.
One's the “everydayness”
of the representation.
I'm a trained actor and I studied acting,
its history and whatnot.
There are theatrical truths
where we develop habits in theater
such as "magnanimous truths".
To the point where
our metaphors have changed,
the performance
of our identities has changed,
the manner of speech
has changed,
and even the psyche
of the general public has changed.
As a contemporary performance maker,
those are what I look for,
the overall sense of “everydayness”.
Of the present day?
If that's the milieu
or setting of the play.
Second is point of view
or points of view.
Nowadays, I'm more interested
in the idea of pluralities,
the plurality of meaning-making,
and where I can step in.
Does the script provide a gap
that the audience can pick up from?
What point of view
am I seeing for the first time?
Is this the first time someone articulated
something for me and the audience?
That's what I'm looking for.
Otherwise, it's either "I've felt this before"
or "I've said this before"
I'm done with that.
Well, my treatment for scripts,
if there is a script in this process,
is that it's literature
first and foremost.
I'm stubborn as a director.
I don't edit literature.
So what I do is,
and playwrights know this,
I stage it first if it's a one-act.
As much as possible, I don't--
I'm stubborn in a sense
because I stick with the text.
And those kinds of directors
are uncommon.
Most directors edit
the script they're given
because how they perceive
or materialize it is different.
There are directors like me who say,
"Okay, let's lift it from the page,"
"Let's see and add elements like this,
and a different point of view."
But what's important is,
let's say there's a house
with an open window
where I can come in,
a designer can come in as well.
If there are gaps
that we could go into.
At PETA more often than not,
it's usually commissioned work.
This means we already had
a discussion with the writer.
Whatever that play is
or its content.
PETA is very content-heavy
and content-driven
But to me I guess
it doesn’t really matter.
If I read a script,
it’s always, "What's the story?"
"What’s the narrative?
Is it new? Is it interesting?"
"Does it interest me whatsoever?"
If after the third page,
it's already a snooze fest,
or like, "What is this?"
Third page?
- No, but I’m good ah.
- Woah, pressure.
I'm good ah,
I read to the very end.
I remember Soxy telling me,
"Don't finish that."
"If you're on page 3 or 4
and you don't like it ,"
"Just drop it."
I still finish it, but
you can already tell
with the tempo or feel, 3-4 pages in.
It’s important
that something excites me,
it doesn’t have to be perfect.
But as I’m reading,
I need to see images
since I'm the director, right?
So the goal is to visualize it.
What has excited you
in previous plays that you’ve read?
When I read your “Kafatiran”
(to Dingdong),
I liked it just to be
as immediate as possible.
She was a reader
for Virgin Labfest one time.
During that time,
when I read his play,
he was one of the few--
You become engaged
when you read it.
I'm really shallow.
I mean I like funny scripts.
I like sort of real--
I mean if it's stylized, stylized.
But for me, it's got to be
always rooted in reality.
I don't like reading plays
that make me go, "Was this researched?"
It should be grounded, rooted
in the kind of truth and reality that's--
Of course, I’m always looking
for what the playwright wants to say
and do I agree with it?
Or will PETA?
‘Cause I’m artistic director for PETA.
Will PETA agree with this point of view?
And that’s very important for us.
I love working with original work.
I do. All my life I think
that’s what I really know
how to do because
the journey is great.
You journey together with the writer
and you don’t know what’s going to happen.
That’s what I love.
It’s like either...
it's two things for me,
either what I'll do is bad or good
because in between is mediocre
and that's forgettable.
So I'd rather be extremely bad or good
because you know what I mean?
For people to talk about it.
They backstab you,
but become friendly in front of you.
I just think that that’s the best part
about original work
because you don’t really know.
We (with J-mee) were discussing
in the car on the way here
I told her it's really important for me,
you know my Tagalog isn’t great.
So for me, it’s more important
when we read.
I love reading
and I hear the actors
because that will set
the kind of rhythm,
you can see the quality of the words
and language of the writer.
And you need to hear it
because at the end of the day,
it’s a performance, right?
But for me--
because I want to put it
on stage I need to hear the--
that’s the first way I want to hear it.
Like a cadence, a sound,
how the words ring with each other.
So I need the use of words,
to me, is also very, very important.
The language.
And can I visualize stuff as I’m reading?
Do they turn into images?
For the actors, of course,
if you're given a script
the role is offered
to you and so on.
What do you look for
before agreeing to do it?
- We were trained to read the play as is.
-The whole, as is.
Not from the point of view
of the character or anything.
From there, if the story itself
resonates with me,
then I'm interested,
regardless if it's a lead role,
supporting role or a passerby,
If it’s a good story,
we want to do it.
What's usually a good story for you?
Or resonates with you?
Well first, it has to be familiar,
but at the same time totally different.
If that makes sense.
Same, same,
but different as they say.
In a way, you could still relate
but it's better because
you haven't experienced it yet.
Something like that.
How interesting would this be?
I think I understand it.
There's a lot that could be done,
but it's not within my experiences
or I haven't done anything like it.
Something like that.
Those are the first thoughts I get
after reading something.
If it's saying something important,
like what Sir Chris said,
if it's saying something important,
it could be the most
ordinary story in the world,
but if it's saying
something important,
then I want to do it.
How about you, Ross?
In my case,
as a newbie,
I'm fairly new to acting
I want to--
Weren't you a child star?
The plays I want to act in,
for example, are those
with a character I anchor to
and whose story I follow through
from beginning to end.
Plays that don't spell everything out,
but the choices made
by the character are wild
throughout the story.
I like it when it makes me think
"Oh, this is possible."
So when I see something
like that in the script,
- I want to do it.
- It excites you.
It's totally new to me.
What we like are those
that take us out of our comfort zone.
When you're not
in your comfort zone,
you become more open
to other possible choices.
You were saying something
important that really strikes you.
What does that mean?
What's important to you
as directors? as actors?
When it articulates something new
that's very distinct, very unique to the times.
That's one.
So, political?
It could be political,
let's say me as a gay man.
For example,
I feel like I haven't been
totally represented.
On how I speak,
the complexities of my identity online.
I code switch from Tagalog to English,
those kinds of things.
What's new after a long history
of meaning-making in theater?
What are the new things
we say today?
- What's important?
What's important for me now,
especially specific to now,
is to hear what's
on the other side of the wall.
Most of the time, I feel like
we're in an echo chamber.
That's my judgment now.
We perform in an echo chamber
or people who
usually agree with us
are people who go to the theater.
They're the people
who remain throughout the years.
We educate them.
But there are people
on the other side of the wall
whose perspectives
I haven't heard of.
The unconverted,
something like that?
or caricatures in our point of view.
So that's what I'm looking for now.
It's not as simple as a populist thing.
Parents, relatives,
they're people we know.
There's something there
that I feel like I haven't heard of yet.
That's the challenge everytime.
Outside what we know,
all of us in this room agree
that it's what's on the other side
that needs to be onstage.
Basically the same.
When you say important,
we should immediately look at our stories.
The areas we should be looking at
are history or folk tales
that people don't know of
because what's written
in the history books are full of gaps.
And sometimes point of views.
Some stories have been told
so many times
that when a new point
of view comes along,
it opens up an old situation
that will give us new lessons
and new perspectives.
To me that should be
an important story to follow through.
For personal stories,
again, I like stories
that seem invisible.
We see it everyday,
but don't talk about or dissect it.
- Like there's no voice.
- Voiceless.
Voiceless characters have been
appealing to me ever since.
Even the first play I wrote,
"Buwan at Baril,"
was practically giving a voice
to what was rendered invisible then
because they were underground.
Somehow that has been
appealing to me all throughout.
The idea of looking for stories
that give voice to the voiceless.
For me, nowadays,
being judgmental
has been prevalent in social media.
Just by reading a headline
with "Duterte" on it,
people already start to judge.
The script's importance for me
is for people to see
the thought process of characters
who you can't judge at face-value
if they dress or act this way.
For people to see
why they do the things they do.
Why do they do this certain action?
That's my take on it.
For people to see
the reason behind every action.
It's not a headline,
not the tip of the iceberg
so they can see
- The deeper--
- Where the action came from.
- Can I add to that?
Like what you said,
just going deeper I suppose,
when people reduce an issue,
I guess, under the microscope,
that's what's important
to me as well.
When people personally feel
that it's not important to bring to light,
but sometimes
the smallest decisions we make are--
it causes a ripple effect,
it affects the bigger picture.
As you said, there's a voice
outside the wall.
There's really no
black and white, right?
That's also what we want
to come across, I suppose.
We have to see that nobody--
I'm really going to say it?
That there really isn't a "villain".
Maybe we think there are
because we don't agree with them.
But if we get to see
the personal stuff
behind their decision,
then we will see
that they're just human beings
like everyone else.
Fallible and all that.
And I think that's interesting
to write about and talk about.
How about you?
I will argue that point of view.
For certain--
I think basically it's that.
I mean, Like Chris and I -- same.
It should be something,
a source from our times
that's relevant and important.
I think that's what's important for--
because it's the way we tell stories.
The choices that we make.
The sophisticated
point of view in storytelling
whether it's like that,
really fleshing out
everybody's motivation
so we see that we're all
coming from places of truth
and not stereotypes.
But I guess--
how that works out,
who wins or who loses
or which of the argument.
I believe there has to be
an argument that matters more,
We can't just be blameless,
or say "we're just human"
because all our actions
have repercussions
and some repercussions
are really dangerous.
And I guess, I don't want to--
obviously, I'd like
to make interesting theater
irregardless if we’re
content-heavy or whatever.
The sophistication of the writer,
the philosophies and ideas behind it.
You can read it,
I think from his words
his choices of scenes,
the clashing of things,
that's where you'll see
the writer's sophistication of thought.
Sometimes, I get to read this,
yes, there's content, but it's too weak.
Makes me want to say,
"Hija, study more or expand
your real understanding--"
- Her worldview.
Yeah, her worldview.
so the arguments
are rich inside, on both sides.
As writers, you're supposed
to argue for both sides.
Actually, that's what makes it rich.
So what we're looking for
is the richness of argument that happens.
I'll go back to the new work.
Sometimes, that also gets added on
during rehearsals.
‘Cause that can also
be something that,
based on your work.
The actors can either
improvise on or expand-
and you guys come in
and sort of clean it up.
because the actors
have been working on the piece.
So that’s the beauty
of being able to keep on--
working at the script
because then you can
really expand it.
I'm sure that it also helps you
to hear the words out loud
and to see the actors
are moving it
and speaking it
Those sophisticated arguments--
can be further developed.
based on your work.
the actors can either
improvise on or expand
and you guys come in
and sort of clean it up
because the actors
have been working on the piece.
So that’s the beauty
of being able to keep on
working at the script
because then you can really expand it.
Okay, let's reverse the mirror.
Maybe it'd be good to ask you
(playwrights) what you expect.
So the script's been
submitted and accepted,
and JA, Chris, and
Angeli are excited.
What kind of process
do you expect?
Because the usual attitude,
well not usual, it’s
not really usual
one attitudes of the playwright is,
"Here it is, it's up to you."
"Surprise me."
What kind of relationship
do you expect with the director,
with the actors,
and with the whole production?
When I write or if it's
a commissioned work,
I alwayssee my script
as a proposal.
It's like submitting
my personal proposal
to those people there.
I see it as a collaborative process.
I'm not saying
my script's the bible.
I know there are still
a lot of gaps in between
because I'm just one writer.
I believe the director's pulse
is important.
As it is being produced,
I just hope they look
at what works.
I'm kind of expecting
to be part of the process
in terms of the
actors' rehearsal,
and they have
something to contribute.
In order to clean it up,
to improve, to argue
why you think this works or not,
then we try to include it.
I see the text as something
open in the first part.
We can still work on it
with the help of the actors,
directors, production designer.
Only after it's mounted or formed
can we say if it needs
improving or not.
I see the text or the script
as a never-ending—
not really never-ending,
but a process-driven
kind of meaning-making
or art-making.
I like that collaborative process
with the director and with the actors.
Especially the actors,
they will really
anchor themselves
on one particular character,
whether it’s their character
that they’re doing
or they’re just reading
for that particular session,
where there're a lot of questions
like “Where did this line come from?”
which would also make
the writers wonder.
And it could really change
the whole script.
Is it like defending
your thesis or something?
Defend, but you're open to--
To suggestions and ideas.
Sometimes you'll see
from version 1 to version 8.
Or even to version 2
there'd be huge changes.
It’s all with trust that they’re all
contributing to make this a better work.
It's also a bit
ego-crushing, isn't it?
The fact that you worked hard on it
for so many months,
and when they read it,
"Why's it like this?"
"Can we change this part
'cause I don't understand it..."
So you feel that there's something
that you really have to set aside.